Introduction to Data Journalism 

Jake Kara, jkara@wesleyan.edu 

Oct. 30, 2017

# Lead (or "lede") writing revisited

1. Short
2. Sets up expectations 
3. Sets stylistic tone of the story

### 1

Jonathan Doe, a white, male teenager from South Florida, started
experimenting with drugs at the age of 15. He thought it could be a way to
connect with his peers, after being bullied for most of his childhood. What
started out as occasional marijuana usage led to experimentation with
harder drugs and eventually, an almost fatal overdose at the age of 17.

### 2

Fentanyl is an opioid painkiller similar to heroin, morphine, and cough
medication codeine. It is a drug that is often prescribed to people to
manage severe pain after surgery, and chronic pain.

### 3

A man and a woman are pronounced dead at a hospital in Hartford, CT. In
both instances the cause of death is recorded as being, “acute heroin
intoxication”, and then marked again – “accident”. What separates these
accounts, however, is about 59 years. The man died at 79 years of age,
while the girl at only 14.

### 4

Federal, state, and local governments have not yet wrangled
prescription drug addiction under their control.

In Connecticut, the opioid crisis has reached epidemic proportions. Data
gathered by the Office of the Medical Examiner reports that in less than
five years 3,583 lives have been lost to overdosing. The trend is not
slowing down either. 2017 is on pace for 1,076 overdoses, up from 917 in
2016.

### 5

According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse, more than 90 American’s
die per day due to overdose on opioid drugs such as heroin. In 2016,
Connecticut alone had over 500 overdose deaths involving heroin; up from
150% from 2012. In response to this quickly growing epidemic, lawmakers and
community organizations are scrambling to provide resources to their
citizens dependent on opioids.

### 6

Over the past five years, the rate of accidental deaths from opioids in
Connecticut has quadrupled. Now more deadly than guns and automobile
accidents combined, drug abuse threatens to damage the quality of life in
one of the nation's wealthiest and most developed states. Mirroring the
rise of drug deaths across the United States and in particular the central
east, the most heavily impacted demographic has been poor Caucasian men.

### 7

Data analyzed from the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner showed that the
use of fentanyl in accidental drug overdose deaths has drastically
increased from January 2012-June 2017.

### 8

Fentanyl is a powerful and effective opioid that’s often administered in
minute doses following surgery — so why are some calling the the drug the
cause of the next American drug epidemic? Medical professionals across the
nation are familiar with the drug, but seem unsurprised by the spike in
nation-wide abuse.


### 9

Opioid deaths have been on the rise across the country in recent
years. Over 3 million Americans have become dependent on these prescription
drugs, and, more importantly, nearly 50,000 Americans die every year from
opioid related deaths (Park, Haeyoun, and Matthew Bloch. “How the Epidemic
of Drug Overdose Deaths Ripples Across America.”) Connecticut is no
exception. Accidental overdose deaths constitute a major problem in the
state of Connecticut, which can be seen in Middlesex County, especially in
its largest city, Middletown. By honing in on Middletown, a city of 50,000
that lies at the southernmost tip of the Hartford-Springfield Metropolitan
Region, we can begin to see how the epidemic affects the typical New
England city. In an effort to gain the most accurate explanation of how a
city like Middletown is affected, we spoke with Dr. Saxe, the former
chairman of the Middlesex Hospital Emergency Department.

### 10

From 2012 to 2016, deaths caused by opioid-related overdoses in Hartford
has quadrupled, leaving the city in an endlessly spiraling epidemic.

Despite an increase in opioid rehabilitation center populations and the
advancement of treatments for addiction, overdose death numbers continue to
rise and don’t seem to be slowing down. So, why is this the case? How can
treatments and deaths be simultaneously increasing?

# Charts

[img](img)

# Newsroom exercise

Get together and choose a topic you want to explore, such as baseball or
car crashes. 

Brainstorm a list of questions. 

For each question, brainstorm the types of data and human sources that
could help answer this question. 

Divide up the labor and come up with as much information as you can about
the topic by the end of class. 

### Newsworthiness refresher

* Impact
* Proximity
* Timeliness
* Prominence
* Novelty
* Conflict
* Relevance
* Usefulness
* Human interest